We’ve talked about plastics quite a 
bit on this channel over the years. It  
is of course one of the most versatile and 
useful material groups known to humankind,  
without which our modern 
world would simply not exist.
But they’re also a huge source of CO2 emissions 
in production, which is a problem still requiring  
a robust and workable solution, AND, largely as 
a result of human inability to give a damn about  
where plastic products go after we’ve used them 
and tossed them away, they’re also clogging up  
river systems in certain parts of the world and 
eventually making their way into our oceans to  
cause even more damage there. They take decades 
or centuries, or in some cases even MILLENNIA to  
break down, and as they physically disintegrate 
they form microplastics that get into the marine  
food chain and eventually into human beings who 
choose to eat seafood. I realise you know all that  
stuff already, but it never hurts to remind 
ourselves of these sorts of things, does it?
According to Statista, we humans 
produced more than four hundred  
million metric tonnes of new 
plastics in twenty-twenty-two,  
and that number could be as high as one point 
two BILLION metric tonnes by twenty sixty.
The plastics that do get into the oceans tend to 
move around in the currents and then get caught up  
in so-called sub-tropical gyres which concentrate 
large quantities of the garbage swirling round and  
round, like water circling a plughole, eventually 
taking it down to the depths. Perhaps the best  
known of these is the North Pacific Garbage 
Patch which is reckoned to contain more than  
eighty-thousand metric tonnes of floating plastic 
debris. We humans have made a few well meaning,  
but ultimately a bit half-arsed attempts at 
cleaning it all up, so most of it is still there.
Now though, new research has discovered 
that nature has got bored waiting for us  
to sort it out and has started to find its 
own solutions to the ocean plastics problem.
Hello and welcome to Just Have a Think.
The study in question comes from a group 
of scientists at the Royal Netherlands  
Institute for Sea Research in conjunction with 
colleagues from Utrecht University, the Ocean  
Cleanup Foundation and research institutes in 
Paris, Copenhagen and St Gallen, Switzerland.
One important characteristic that ties the 
majority of man-made plastics together is  
that they consist of polymer chains 
made from oil-based hydrocarbons,  
and that’s where it gets interesting, because that 
means plastics are a potential carbon and energy  
source for microbes that exist on land AND in the 
sea. The challenge those microbes have is finding  
a way to break down the intentionally robust and 
strong bonds in the polymer chains that we humans  
have so cleverly constructed, so that they can 
get at the constituent monomers they can use.
Ultraviolet light from the sun starts to do that 
job very slowly as plastics bob around on the  
ocean surface, but what this latest research 
paper found was a type of ocean fungus called  
Parengyodontium Album, or P.album for short, 
that can essentially consume POLYETHYLENE,  
which makes up the bulk of marine plastics, 
biodegrade it and convert it into carbon dioxide.
Now you might be thinking, oh well that’s 
just great Dave. We’ve discovered something  
that takes one problem and turns into 
another one! Brilliant! But bear with  
me here. The science bods measured 
the CO2 being produced and they reckon  
it’s about the equivalent of the low 
amount produced when humans breathe.
Scientists are already aware of the amazing 
ability of land-based fungi to degrade vast  
amounts and varieties of compounds including 
complex hydrocarbons like lignin and cellulose,  
and pollutants like DDT, and EVEN environmentally 
hazardous compounds like TNT. They do that with a  
bunch of powerful digestive enzymes, and in 
fact several land-based fungal species are  
already known to degrade plastic polymers. Much 
less is known about marine-based fungi though,  
so this new discovery represents 
something of a breakthrough.
The team travelled to the North Pacific 
garbage patch to do their research. Having  
scooped up a decent representative sample 
of floating plastics they isolated the  
marine fungus from the microbial film 
covering the waste and took it back to  
the lab to grow it in properly controlled 
conditions and on specific plastic types.
The important breakthrough here was 
that the researchers were able to put  
some numbers to how quickly the fungus 
was able to break down the PE plastic.
In lab conditions that rate was around 
zero-point-zero-five percent per day.  
That might not sound particularly 
rapid to you and me, but it equates  
to full consumption in two-thousand 
days or about five and a half years.
On a ‘plastics degradation’ 
timescale that’s like lighting fast! 
One major caveat is that the P.album 
fungi was tested under two different  
conditions – one in the presence of UV 
light and one without any light. The  
results showed that there does need to be at 
least a little bit of UV degradation first,  
even for just a few days, before 
the fungus could get to work.
For surface plastics that‘s not a 
problem, but of course plastics are  
now being found at greater depths, 
and even right down on the seabed.
In a recent interview with the 
online journal Phys dot org,  
the paper’s lead author, Annika Vaksmaa said
"Marine fungi can break down complex materials 
made of carbon. There are numerous amounts of  
marine fungi, so it is likely that in 
addition to the four species identified  
so far, other species also contribute to 
plastic degradation. There are still many  
questions about the dynamics of how plastic 
degradation takes place in deeper layers,"
Scientists are not resting 
on their laurels though,  
or relying solely on nature for all the 
answers. In fact, this latest paper comes  
hot on the heels of an earlier study, 
focussed on a polymer called Nylon-6,  
which is typically found in cheap carpets 
and clothing, and most significantly is  
the chief component of the huge catch nets 
used in the modern-day fishing industry.
Fishing nets are routinely discarded 
at sea by unscrupulous operators,  
and they’ve become the scourge of the oceans,  
polluting water bodies, damaging coral reefs, 
and endangering birds and marine animals.
A team at Northwestern University in Illinois 
has been developing a new catalyst that they  
reckon can completely break down the polymer 
chains in Nylon 6 in just a matter of minutes.  
Their tests also show that there are no harmful 
by-products produced as a result of the reaction,  
and perhaps most importantly of all, their new 
process doesn’t involve any nasty toxic chemicals,  
to make it work, and the reaction happens at a 
much lower temperature than previous methods.
And to cap it all, at the end of the 
process you actually get a workable product  
that can be upcycled into new Nylon6 polymers.
The most common method of dealing with Nylon6  
at the moment is simply to bury it in 
land fill or burn it, releasing CO2,  
toxic pollutants and nitrogen oxides 
that cause all sorts of health problem. 
Previous attempts at breaking down this tough 
polymer have involved temperatures as high  
as three hundred and fifty degrees 
Celsius, plus high-pressure steam,  
which of course requires huge amounts of energy to 
produce, or basically melting it with strong acid,  
which is not ideal, and doesn’t produce 
anything that you can re-use afterwards. 
The Illinois team achieved their improved result 
using Yttrium and lanthanide metals as a catalyst.  
Yttrium is a cheap and abundant element found 
in the transition metals section of the periodic  
table, and the lanthanide metals sit right 
underneath with similar chemical compositions 
Samples of Nylon6 were heated up 
to just above it’s melting point  
of two hundred and fifteen degrees Celsius 
in the presence of only a very tiny amount  
of the Yttrium lanthanide catalyst, and 
ninety-ninety percent depolymerisation  
was achieved. In other words, the Nylon6 
literally fell apart in a matter of minutes. 
When they analysed what had happened during the 
reaction , the scientists found that the Yttrium  
Lanthanide catalyst was able to chemically 
unzip the Nylon chains and cause parts of the  
chain to jump from one to another in a process 
called inter-chain hopping. Precisely how and  
why that effect occurs is a bit outside 
the scope of my limited brain I’m afraid, 
but the important thing is the result. Which is 
that this process was found to be particularly  
effective on those pesky fishing nets, as 
well on cheap nylon carpets and clothing. 
One of the most encouraging advantages 
of this new process is the fact that the  
catalyst is highly selective. It only attacks 
Nylon-6 polymers and doesn’t do any damage to  
surrounding materials. That’s great news for 
the recycling industry because it means they  
can apply the method to large volumes of unsorted 
waste and selectively target the Nylon-6 products. 
In an ideal world we would have already found 
robust alternatives to oil based plastics, but  
the reality is that most of the options, including 
bioplastics, have their own challenges like cost,  
energy consumption and land use, so even 
after we finally wake up and stop burning oil,  
we will still be processing it in refineries 
to make the solid materials that have become  
indispensable to modern western life. Finding 
ways to recycle that plastic without degrading  
it has become something of a holy grail.
The authors of this report point out that recycled  
Nylon6 for example, is actually more valuable than 
virgin nylon, largely due to the high demand for  
recycled materials in the fashion industry. If 
processes like this can be developed at scale  
for all plastic types then it would represent a 
very significant reduction in the carbon footprint  
of producing virgin monomers from crude oil.
And, you know, every little helps doesn’t it? 
The Illinois team have already filed 
patents on their procedure and are  
already getting interest from industrial 
partners, so hopefully it won’t be long before  
we see this process in a commercial environment 
helping to solve our global plastics problem. 
That’s it for this week. A massive thank you, 
as always, to our amazing Patreon supporters  
who keep this channel completely independent AND 
enable me to keep ads and sponsorship messages out  
of your way. And an extra special ‘thank you’ 
to the folks whose names are scrolling up the  
screen beside me here, all of whom celebrate 
an anniversary of Patreon support in August.
If you’d like to support my work here at the 
channel and get involved with other like-minded  
folks, then you can do just that by visiting 
patreon dot com forward slash just have a think. 
And of course, you can hugely support us and 
help us get to six hundred thousand subscribers  
by hitting the free subscribe button 
on YouTube. Doesn’t cost a penny to do  
that and it’s just a simple click away, 
either down there or on that icon there. 
As always, thanks very much for 
watching! Have a great week,  
and remember to just have a think.
See you next week.